# 2.2 Script vs Tag

ColdFusion has been designed to allow the use of ColdFusion tags and
ColdFusion script. Functionally, both will be interpreted equally and
will achieve the same result. The use of ColdFusion Tags and ColdFusion
Script is up to personal or team preference. One or two ColdFusion
operations are currently Tag only, as of this tutorial, but these will
be made available in ColdFusion script in future releases.

Some developers write all ColdFusion code in Tags. Some developers write
all ColdFusion code in Script. Some write the view portions of their
ColdFusion code in Tags and the business layer portion in Script. As
long as you stay consistent, all approaches are valid. The overarching
rule should be legibility and consistency.

Let's look at some statements and compare the differences:

### Setting a Variable

```cfml
In CFTag:

<cfset variable = "value">


In CFScript:

<cfscript>
    variable = "value";
</cfscript>
```

### Looping Over an Array

```cfml
In CFTag:

<cfset fruitArray = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]>
<cfloop from="1" to="#arrayLen(fruitArray)#" index="i">
    <cfoutput>#fruitArray[i]#</cfoutput>
</cfloop>


In CFScript:

<cfscript>
    fruitArray = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"];
    for(i=1; i <= arrayLen(fruitArray); i++){
        writeOutput(fruitArray[i]);
    }
</cfscript>
```

Some developers find the ColdFusion Script syntax to resemble other
familiar programming languages. ColdFusion is designed to provide a
welcoming and productive developer experience. Try both styles to see
which you prefer.

Throughout this tutorial we will sometimes show code in either the Tag
syntax, the Script syntax or both. Differentiation between the two should
not be a hard task. Also note that while Tags can be written anywhere in
a CFML file, if you want to use Script syntax you'll have to surround
the code with the ``<cfscript></cfscript>`` tag (as above). From now on, for
simplicity, we will sometimes leave out the surrounding ``cfscript``
tag when writing CFScript code.